!uullttuurreellllee  BBiilldduunnggssaarrmmuutt  uunndd  WWeerrtteewwaannddeell
!eeiinneerr  BBaarrzz,,  DDaajjaannaa  BBaauumm,,  MMeerraall  CCeerrccii,,  NNiinnaa  GGöˆddddeerrttzz  uunndd  TTaabbeeaa  RRaaiiddtt

11  

EEiinnlleeiittuunngg

!nngglleeiicchhhheeiitteenn  iinn  ddeenn  BBiilldduunnggsscchhaanncceenn  ssiinndd  dduurrcchh  ddiiee  sseeiitt  eeiinneemm  gguutteenn  JJaahhrrzzeehhnntt  iinn  eerr--
nneeuutteerr  BBllü¸ttee  sstteehheennddee  bbiilldduunnggssssoozziioollooggiisscchhee  FFoorrsscchhuunngg  vviieellffaacchh  ddookkuummeennttiieerrtt..  KKoonnnnttee  ddaass  
DDaatteennmmaatteerriiaall  zzuu  ddeenn  ssttrruukkttuurreelllleenn  BBiilldduunnggssbbeennaacchhtteeiilliigguunnggeenn  iinn  ddeenn  6600eerr  JJaahhrreenn  gguutt  zzuurr  
FFoorrmmeell  vvoonn  ddeerr  „Ñkkaatthhoolliisscchheenn  AArrbbeeiitteerrttoocchhtteerr  vvoomm  LLaannddee“ì  vveerrddiicchhtteett  wweerrddeenn,,  ssoo  hhaatt  ssiicchh  
ddiiee  nneeuueerree  DDiisskkuussssiioonn  vveerrssttä‰rrkktt  ddeemm  „Ñmmuusslliimmiisscchheenn  mmä‰nnnnlliicchheenn  JJuuggeennddlliicchheenn  aauuss  ddeerr  TTrraa--
bbaanntteennssttaaddtt“ì  zzuuggeewwaannddtt..  DDeerr  vvoorrlliieeggeennddee  BBeeiittrraagg  wwiillll  wweenniiggeerr  eeiinnee  DDeesskkrriippttiioonn  ffaakkttiisscchh  
ggeeggeebbeenneerr  !nngglleeiicchhhheeiitteenn  iinn  ddeenn  BBiilldduunnggsscchhaanncceenn  lliieeffeerrnn  aallss  vviieellmmeehhrr  vvoorr  ddeemm  HHiinntteerrggrruunndd  
ddeerr  WWeerrtteewwaannddeellffoorrsscchhuunngg  HHyyppootthheesseenn  zzuu  ddeenn  GGrrü¸nnddeenn  ffü¸rr  ddaass  SScchheeiitteerrnn  vvoonn  BBiilldduunnggss--
kkaarrrriieerreenn  ddiisskkuuttiieerreenn..  DDaabbeeii  wwiirrdd  vvoorr  aalllleemm  ddeerr  FFrraaggee  nnaacchhggeeggaannggeenn,,  iinnwwiieeffeerrnn  bbaassaallee  WWeerrtt--
oorriieennttiieerruunnggeenn  iinn  bbeessttiimmmmtteenn  MMiilliieeuuss  ssiicchh  fföˆrrddeerrnndd  ooddeerr  hheemmmmeenndd  aauuff  BBiilldduunnggssvveerrllä‰uuffee  
aauusswwiirrkkeenn  kköˆnnnneenn..  IInn  ddiieesseemm  SSiinnnnee  wweerrddeenn  zzuunnä‰cchhsstt  zzwweeii  AAnnssä‰ttzzee  ddeerr  nneeuueerreenn  SSoozziioollooggiiee  
sskkiizzzziieerrtt::  DDiiee  WWeerrtteewwaannddeelltthheessee,,  wwiiee  ssiiee  vvoonn  RRoonnaalldd  IInngglleehhaarrtt  vvoorr  ccaa..  4400  JJaahhrreenn  iinn  ddiiee  
ssoozziiaallwwiisssseennsscchhaaffttlliicchhee  KKuullttuurrssoozziioollooggiiee  eeiinnggeebbrraacchhtt  uunndd  sseeiitthheerr  mmaannnniiggffaacchh  mmooddii(cid:191)  zziieerrtt  
uunndd  wweeiitteerr  eennttwwiicckkeelltt  wwuurrddee..  SSoowwiiee  ddiiee  LLeebbeennssssttiillffoorrsscchhuunngg  mmiitt  iihhrreenn  MMiilliieeuuttyyppoollooggiieenn,,  
wwoobbeeii  iinnssbbeessoonnddeerree  ddaass  iinn  ddeerr  BBRRDD  vvoonn  SSiinnuuss--SSoocciioovviissiioonn  eennttwwiicckkeellttee  MMooddeellll  mmiitt  sseeiinneerr  
rreeiicchheenn  eemmppiirriisscchheenn  BBaassiiss  aauucchh  iimm  BBlliicckk  aauuff  BBiilldduunnggssoorriieennttiieerruunnggeenn  uunndd  BBiilldduunnggssvveerrhhaalltteenn  
eeiinneenn  wwiicchhttiiggeenn  BBeezzuuggssppuunnkktt  ddaarrsstteelllltt..  NNaacchhddeemm  iinnzzwwiisscchheenn  aauucchh  eeiinn  MMiilliieeuu--MMooddeellll  ffü¸rr  ddiiee  
ddeeuuttsscchhee  MMiiggrraanntteennppooppuullaattiioonn  eennttwwiicckkeelltt  wwuurrddee,,  kkaannnn  ddiieessee  iinn  eeiinneemm  ddrriitttteenn  SScchhrriitttt  ddaarraauuff  
hhiinn  bbeeffrraaggtt  wweerrddeenn,,  iinnwwiieewweeiitt  ssiicchh  ddiiee  LLeebbeennssssttiillee  uunndd  LLeebbeennsseeiinnsstteelllluunnggeenn  iinn  bbeessttiimmmmtteenn  
MMiiggrraanntteenn--MMiilliieeuuss  fföˆrrddeerrnndd  ooddeerr  hheemmmmeenndd  aauuff  BBiilldduunnggssaassppiirraattiioonneenn  uunndd  BBiilldduunnggsskkaarrrriieerreenn  
aauusswwiirrkkeenn..  SScchhlliieeßﬂlliicchh  wwiirrdd  vviieerrtteennss  ddiiee  iinn  ddeenn  lleettzztteenn  JJaahhrreenn  gglleeiicchhssaamm  uunntteerr  uummggeekkeehhrrtteemm  
VVoorrzzeeiicchheenn  wwiieeddeerreennttddeecckkttee  GGeennddeerr--PPeerrssppeekkttiivvee  aauuff  sscchhuulliisscchheess  LLeerrnneenn  bbzzww..  SScchheeiitteerrnn  ddaarr--
aauuffhhiinn  ü¸bbeerrpprrü¸fftt,,  oobb  ssiicchh  aauucchh  iimm  BBeerreeiicchh  ddeerr  WWeerrttoorriieennttiieerruunnggeenn  ggeesscchhlleecchhtteerrssppeezzii(cid:191)  sscchhee  
SSiiggnnaattuurreenn  uunndd  uunntteerrsscchhiieeddlliicchhee  EEnnttwwiicckklluunnggssvveerrllä‰uuffee  rreekkoonnssttrruuiieerreenn  llaasssseenn..  IInnssbbeessoonnddeerree  
ddeerr  RRü¸cckkggrriiffff  aauuff  ttrraaddiittiioonneellllee  MMä‰nnnnlliicchhkkeeiittssbbiillddeerr  iisstt  aauuff  sseeiinnee  sseellbbssttzzeerrssttöˆrreerriisscchheenn  ooddeerr  
ssuubbvveerrssiivveenn  PPootteennttiiaallee  zzuu  bbeeffrraaggeenn,,  wweennnn  eerr  ddeennnn  zzuurreecchhtt  aallss  MMiittuurrssaacchhee  ffü¸rr  pprroobblleemmaattiisscchhee  
BBiilldduunnggssvveerrllä‰uuffee  zzuu  iiddeennttii(cid:191)  zziieerreenn  iisstt..

22   WWeerrttoorriieennttiieerruunngg  aallss  EErrffoollggssiinnddiikkaattoorr  ??

DDaass  BBiilldduunnggssssyysstteemm  iisstt  dduurrcchh  ddeenn  NNaacchhwweeiiss  uunntteerrsscchhiieeddlliicchheerr  ZZuuggaannggsscchhaanncceenn  zzuu  hhöˆhheerreenn  
BBiilldduunnggssaabbsscchhllü¸sssseenn  hheerraauussggeeffoorrddeerrtt..  EErrggä‰nnzzeenndd  zzuurr  uunnbbeessttrreeiittbbaarreenn  RReeaalliittä‰tt  ssyysstteemmbbeeddiinngg--
tteerr  BBaarrrriieerreenn  ((zz..  BB..  ffrrü¸hhee  SSeelleekkttiioonn  iimm  ddrreeiigglliieeddrriiggeenn  SScchhuullssyysstteemm,,  ffeehhlleennddee  SSpprraacchhfföˆrrddeerruunngg,,  

9966

HHeeiinneerr  BBaarrzz,,  DDaajjaannaa  BBaauumm,,  MMeerraall  CCeerrccii,,  NNiinnaa  GGöˆddddeerrttzz  uunndd  TTaabbeeaa  RRaaiiddtt

zzuu  wweenniigg  GGaannzzttaaggssaannggeebboottee,,  FFeemmiinniissiieerruunngg  ddeess  LLeehhrreerrbbeerruuffss))  ssoollll  hhiieerr  ddiiee  FFrraaggee  ggeesstteelllltt  
wweerrddeenn,,  oobb  aauucchh  iinn  ddeenn  ssuubbjjeekkttiivveenn  AAllllttaaggssoorriieennttiieerruunnggeenn  vveerraannkkeerrttee  GGrrü¸nnddee  ffü¸rr  ddiiee  uunntteerr--
sscchhiieeddlliicchhee  NNuuttzzuunngg  ddeerr  MMöˆgglliicchhkkeeiitteenn  ddeess  BBiilldduunnggssssyysstteemmss  RReelleevvaannzz  bbeeaannsspprruucchheenn  kköˆnnnneenn..  
WWeellcchhee  RRoollllee  ssppiieelleenn  ddiiee  EEiinnsstteelllluunnggeenn  ddeerr  jjuunnggeenn  MMeennsscchheenn  ffü¸rr  ddeenn  EErrffoollgg  iinn  BBiilldduunngg  uunndd  
BBeerruuff  ??  KKöˆnnnneenn  uunntteerrsscchhiieeddlliicchhee  BBiilldduunnggssvveerrllä‰uuffee  mmiitt  HHiillffee  bbeessttiimmmmtteerr  EEiinnsstteelllluunnggssmmuusstteerr  
eerrkkllä‰rrtt  wweerrddeenn  ??  KKaannnn  bbeeiissppiieellsswweeiissee  ddeerr  ggeerriinnggeerree  EErrffoollgg  ddeerr  mmä‰nnnnlliicchheenn  SScchhü¸lleerr  iimm  aallllggee--
mmeeiinn  bbiillddeennddeenn  BBiilldduunnggssssyysstteemm  eevveennttuueellll  mmiitt  ddeerreenn  EEiinnsstteelllluunngg  zzuu  LLeeiissttuunngg  eerrkkllä‰rrtt  wweerrddeenn  ??
EEiinneenn  SScchhllü¸sssseell  zzuurr  BBeeaannttwwoorrttuunngg  eeiinneerr  ssoollcchheenn  FFrraaggee  bbiieetteett  ddiiee  WWeerrtteewwaannddeellffoorrsscchhuunngg,,  
ddiiee  sseeiitt  JJaahhrrzzeehhnntteenn  ddiiee  EEiinnsstteelllluunnggeenn  jjuunnggeerr  MMeennsscchheenn  eerrhheebbtt..  SSiiee  uunntteerrssuucchhtt  ddiiee  VVeerrä‰nnddee--
rruunnggeenn  ddeerr  EEiinnsstteelllluunnggeenn  uunndd  WWeerrttvvoorrsstteelllluunnggeenn  uunndd  pprrü¸fftt  iinnwwiieewweeiitt  ddiieessee  eeiinneemm  TTrreenndd  uunndd  
eeiinneerr  ddaarrsstteellllbbaarreenn  SSttrruukkttuurr  uunntteerrlliieeggeenn  ((OOeesstteerrddiieekkhhooffff//JJeeggeellkkaa  22000011::  77))..  SSoozziiookkuullttuurreellllee  
WWeerrttee  ssiinndd  ffü¸rr  KKuullttuurr,,  GGeesseellllsscchhaafftt  uunndd  IInnddiivviidduuuumm  iinn  mmeehhrrffaacchheerr  HHiinnssiicchhtt  vvoonn  ggrröˆßﬂtteerr  BBee--
ddeeuuttuunngg  iinnssooffeerrnn  ssiiee  OOrriieennttiieerruunngg  ffü¸rr  ddaass  HHaannddeellnn  vvoonn  PPeerrssoonneenn  uunndd  ssoozziiaalleerr  GGeebbiillddee  bbiieetteenn  
((HHiillllmmaannnn  22000011::  1155))..  WWeerrttee  bbiillddeenn  ddiiee  GGrruunnddllaaggee  ffü¸rr  ddiiee  !mmsseettzzuunngg  ssoozziiaalleerr  NNoorrmmeenn,,  ddiiee  
wwiieeddeerruumm  eeiinnee  wweesseennttlliicchhee  RRoollllee  iimm  ZZuussaammmmeennlleebbeenn  ddeerr  MMeennsscchheenn  ssppiieelleenn..  

DDeerr  WWaannddeell  ddeess  WWeerrtteewwaannddeellss

WWä‰hhrreenndd  iinn  ddeenn  SSoozziiaallwwiisssseennsscchhaafftteenn,,  ddeenn  MMeeddiieenn,,  ddeerr  öˆffffeennttlliicchheenn  MMeeiinnuunngg  uunndd  ddeerr  SSeellbbsstt--
iinntteerrpprreettaattiioonn  mmooddeerrnneerr  GGeesseellllsscchhaafftteenn  llaannggee  ZZeeiitt  ddiiee  AAuuffffaassssuunngg  ddoommiinniieerrttee,,  ddeerr  uurrsspprrü¸nngg--
lliicchhee  WWeerrtteewwaannddeell  hhiinn  zzuu  AAuuttoonnoommiiee  sseettzzee  ssiicchh  uunnggeebbrroocchheenn  ffoorrtt,,  zzeeiiggeenn  nneeuueerree  DDaatteenn  eeiinnee  
vveerrä‰nnddeerrttee  TTeennddeennzz..  „ÑDDeerr  WWeerrtteewwaannddeell  hhaatt  ssiicchh  ggeewwaannddeelltt..  DDaass  PPeennddeell  iisstt  zzuurrü¸cckkggeesscchhllaaggeenn..  
VViieellee  MMeennsscchheenn  ssttrreebbeenn  nniicchhtt  llä‰nnggeerr  nnaacchh  iinnddiivviidduueelllleerr  AAuuttoonnoommiiee  uunndd  SSeellbbssttvveerrwwiirrkklliicchhuunngg,,  
ssiiee  kkoosstteenn  iihhrree  FFrreeiihheeiittssggrraaddee  nniicchhtt  llä‰nnggeerr  aauuss,,  ssiiee  ssiinndd  vviieellmmeehhrr  aauuff  ddeerr  SSuucchhee  nnaacchh  SSiicchheerrhheeiitt,,  
OOrrddnnuunngg  uunndd  GGeemmeeiinnsscchhaafftt“ì  ((HHrraaddiill  22000022::  440099))..  DDiiee  nneeuueerree  FFoorrsscchhuunngg  bbeezziieehhtt  ssiicchh  bbeeii  ddeerr  
SSuucchhee  nnaacchh  GGrrü¸nnddeenn  ffü¸rr  ddeenn  WWaannddeell  ddeess  WWeerrtteewwaannddeellss  aauuff  ddiiee  SSoozziiaalliissaattiioonnss--  ssoowwiiee  aauuff  ddiiee  
MMaannggeellhhyyppootthheessee  IInngglleehhaarrttss  ((eebbdd..::  441177))..  DDaabbeeii  kköˆnnnneenn  ddiiee  !rrssaacchheenn  ddeess  nneeuueenn  WWaannddeellss  vvoorr  
aalllleemm  mmiitt  ddeenn  sscchhwwiieerriiggeerr  wweerrddeennddeenn  öˆkkoonnoommiisscchheenn  RRaahhmmeennbbeeddiinngguunnggeenn  wwiiee  ddeemm  eennggeerr  
wweerrddeennddeenn  AArrbbeeiittssmmaarrkktt  eerrkkllä‰rrtt  wweerrddeenn..  GGeerraaddee  ddiiee  jjuunnggee  GGeenneerraattiioonn  zziieehhtt  aauuss  vveerrä‰nnddeerrtteenn  
RRaahhmmeennbbeeddiinngguunnggeenn  jjeeddoocchh  wweenniiggeerr  aauuff  ddiiee  GGeesseellllsscchhaafftt  bbeezzooggeennee  KKoonnsseeqquueennzzeenn,,  wwiiee  
nnoocchh  iinn  ddeenn  11996600eerr  uunndd  11997700eerr  JJaahhrreenn  zzuu  bbeeoobbaacchhtteenn::  „ÑSSiiee  wwoolllleenn  ffü¸rr  ssiicchh  wwiirrttsscchhaaffttlliicchhee  
SSiicchheerrhheeiitt,,  GGeemmeeiinnsscchhaafftt,,  ssttaabbiillee  OOrrddnnuunnggeenn,,  eeiinnffaacchhee  LLöˆssuunnggeenn,,  ssoozzuussaaggeenn  ‚ÇRRuuhhee  aann  ddeerr  
FFrroonntt‘ë“ì  ((eebbdd..::  441188,,  HHeerrvvoorrhheebbuunngg  iimm  OOrriiggiinnaall))..

DDiieessee  VVeerrä‰nnddeerruunngg  wwiirrkktt  ssiicchh  iinn  ddrreeii  BBeerreeiicchheenn  aauuss..  EErrsstteennss  aallss  WWuunnsscchh  nnaacchh  mmeehhrr  
GGeemmeeiinnsscchhaafftt,,  PPaarrttnneerrsscchhaafftt  uunndd  FFaammiilliiee..  ZZwweeiitteennss  aallss  BBeeddü¸rrffnniiss  nnaacchh  SSiicchheerrhheeiitt,,  ddaass  jjeeddoocchh  
nniicchhtt  mmeehhrr  vvoorrrraannggiigg  aauuff  ddiiee  AAbbwweesseennhheeiitt  vvoonn  KKrriieegg  uunndd  TTeerrrroorr,,  ssoonnddeerrnn  vviieellmmeehhrr  aauuff  ddiiee  
AArrbbeeiittssppllaattzzssiicchheerrhheeiitt  bbeezzooggeenn  iisstt..  DDrriitttteennss  sscchhlliieeßﬂlliicchh  aallss  BBeeddeeuuttuunnggsszzuuwwaacchhss  ssooggeennnnaanntteerr  
mmaatteerriiaalliissttiisscchheerr  WWeerrtthhaallttuunnggeenn  mmiitt  BBeettoonnuunngg  vvoonn  PP(cid:192)  iicchhtt--  uunndd  AAnnppaassssuunnggsswweerrtteenn..  AAuucchh  
ddiieessee  ssiinndd  jjeeddoocchh  ssttaarrkk  sseellbbssttbbeezzooggeenn  uunndd  nnuuttzzeennoorriieennttiieerrtt..  SSoollcchhee  BBeeoobbaacchhttuunnggeenn  eerrggeebbeenn  
ssiicchh  hhaauuppttssä‰cchhlliicchh  aauuss  JJuuggeennddssttuuddiieenn,,  ddiiee  uunntteerr  aannddeerreemm  ddiiee  WWeerrttoorriieennttiieerruunnggeenn  uunndd  EEiinnsstteell--
lluunnggeenn  jjuunnggeerr  MMeennsscchheenn  eerrhheebbeenn..  ZZwwaarr  ssiinndd  DDuukkttuuss  uunndd  FFookkuuss  ddiieesseerr  SSttuuddiieenn  oofftt  uunntteerrsscchhiieedd--
lliicchh,,  ddiiee  EErrggeebbnniissssee  bbeezzü¸gglliicchh  ddeess  WWeerrtteewwaannddeellss  bbeeii  JJuuggeennddlliicchheenn  jjeeddoocchh  ssiinndd  vveerrgglleeiicchhbbaarr::  
IInnddiikkaattoorreenn  ffü¸rr  ddiiee  VVeerrä‰nnddeerruunnggeenn  (cid:191)  nnddeenn  ssiicchh  iimm  nneeuueenn  AAnnssttiieegg  ddeess  AAnntteeiillss  ddeerr  MMaatteerriiaalliisstteenn  

