 

Konzeptpapier 

Expertenteam: „Thema“ 

 

Konzeptpapier 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Expertenteam: 

 

 
Magdalena 
Gippert 

 

Annam Haider 

 

Nicole Kupczik 

 
Nikola Ruck 
 

Kathrin Ziegler  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Impulse – Diagnose, Maßnahmen & 
Evaluation 

“Arbeitsanalyse & -gestaltung“ 

 

 

MomentOS 

Konzeptpapier 

Expertenteam: „Arbeitsanalyse & -
gestaltung“ 

 
Zuständigkeiten 

Impulstag 

Vortrag 1 

 

Nikola Ruck 

 

Kathrin Ziegler 

Vortrag 2 

 

Magdalena Gippert 

 

Nikola Ruck  

 

Work Design - Vergangenheit, 
Gegenwart & Zukunft  

„Meta-Analysis of Job Analysis 
Reliability“ (Dierdorff & Wilson, 
2003)  

„Integrating Motivational, Social, 
and Contextual Work Design 
Features: A Meta-Analytic Summary 
and Theoretical Extension of the 
Work Design Literature“ 
(Humphrey, Nahrgang & Morgeson, 
2007) 

Betrachtung ausgewählter 
Rahmenbedingungen bei der 
Arbeitsgestaltung 

„Intrinsic motivation as a 
moderator on the relationship 
between perceived job autonomy 
and work performance” (Dysvik & 
Kuvaas, 2011) 

„Advanced technology and the 
quality of working life: The effects 
of word processing on video 
typists“ (Buchanan & Boddy, 1982) 

2 

 

