EIoP: Text 2000-015: Abstract

http://eiop.or.at/eiop/texte/2000-015a.htm

 

When Europe Hits Home: Europeanization and Domestic Change 

Tanja A. Börzel and Thomas Risse 

European Integration online Papers (EIoP) Vol. 4 (2000) N°15; 

http://eiop.or.at/eiop/texte/2000-015a.htm

Date of publication in the 

: 29.11.2000 

| Full text | Back to homepage | PDF | 

| This paper's comments page | Send your comment! to this paper |

Keywords

europeanization, governance, institutionalism, institutional isomorphism theory, implementation,

sociological institutionalism, regulation, political science 

Abstract

We argue in this paper in favor of a rather parsimonious theoretical approach to the study of the
domestic impact of Europeanization. Whether we study policies, politics, or polities, a misfit
between European-level and domestic processes, policies, or institutions constitutes the necessary
condition for expecting any change. However, adaptational pressures alone are insufficient. There
must be mediating factors enabling or prohibiting domestic change and accounting for the
empiri-cally observable differential impact of Europe. We have then introduced two pathways
leading to domestic changes which are theoretically grounded in rationalist and sociological
institutionalisms, respectively. On the one hand, rationalist institutionalism follows a logic of
resource redistribution emphasizing the absence of multiple veto points and the presence of
supporting institutions as the main factors facilitating change. On the other hand, sociological
institutionalism exhibits a sociali-zation and learning account focussing on norm entrepreneurs as
"change agents" and the presence of a cooperative political culture as the main mediating factors.
We claim that Europeanization might lead to convergence in policy outcomes, but at best to
"clustered convergence" and continu-ing divergence with regard to policy processes and
instruments, politics, and polities.

Kurzfassung

Dieses Papier stellt einen relativ einfach gefaßten theoretischen Ansatz vor, um die Wirkung der
Europäisierung auf der mitgliedstaatlichen Ebene zu untersuchen. Dabei bildet "Misfit" die
notwendige Bedingung für jegliche Art von Wandel, unabhängig davon, ob politische Programme,
politische Prozesse oder politische Institutionen Gegenstand der Untersuchung sind. Ob der daraus
resultierende Anpassungsdruck jedoch tatsächlich innerstaatlichen Wandel auslöst, hängt von
bestimmten Faktoren ab, die Anpassung befördern oder behindern. Es werden zwei Pfade
vorgestellt, durch die innerstaatlicher Wandel hervorgebracht werden kann und die sich auf die
zwei großen Schulen des Institutionalismus zurückführen lassen. Die rationalistische Spielart des
Institutionalismus folgt einer Logik der Ressourcenumverteilung und hebt das Fehlen multipler
Vetopositionen sowie das Vorhandensein von unterstützenden Institutionen als den innerstaatlichen
Wandel begünstigende Faktoren hervor. Der soziologische Institutionalismus hingegen stellt auf
Sozialisierungs- und Lernprozesse ab und konzentriert sich dabei auf die Rolle von "norm
entrepreneurs" als Agenten des Wandels sowie auf das Vorhandensein einer kooperativen
politischen Kultur als die beiden Faktoren, die innerstaatliche Veränderungen befördern. Beide
Pfade lassen nur bedingt Konvergenz erwarten, insbesondere hinsichtlich politischer Prozesse und
politischer Institutionen. 

Dr. Tanja A. Börzel is researcher at both the European University Institute in Florence and the Max
Planck Project Group on Common Goods in Bonn; Prof.Thomas Risse is professor at the European
University Institute in Florence; email: boerzel@iue.it and risse@iue.it

The author

1 of 1

29.11.00 09:05

